.TH PIF 1 "2025" "Penguins Immutable Framework" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
pif \- manage immutable Linux systems through a unified interface
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pif
[\fB\-\-config\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB\-v\fR]
\fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pif
is the command-line interface for the Penguins Immutable Framework.
It provides a single, backend-agnostic surface for initialising,
upgrading, rolling back, and managing snapshots on immutable Linux systems.
.PP
The active backend is selected in
.I /etc/pif/pif.toml
under the
.B [pif].backend
key.
All operations are dispatched through the Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL)
to the configured backend.
.PP
Supported backends:
.RS
.TP
.B abroot
Vanilla-OS/ABRoot \(em A/B partition swap + OCI images
.TP
.B ashos
ashos/ashos \(em BTRFS snapshot tree
.TP
.B frzr
ChimeraOS/frzr \(em read-only BTRFS subvolume deploy
.TP
.B akshara
blend-os/akshara \(em YAML-declared system rebuild
.TP
.B btrfs-dwarfs
btrfs-dwarfs-framework \(em BTRFS+DwarFS hybrid blend layer
.TP
.B nixos
NixOS \(em generation-based passthrough
.RE
.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-config " FILE"
Path to the configuration file.
Defaults to the first file found in:
.IR $HOME/.config/pif/pif.toml ,
.IR /etc/pif/pif.toml ,
.IR /usr/share/pif/pif.toml ,
.IR ./pif.toml .
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output.
.
.SH COMMANDS
.
.SS pif init
.B pif init
[\fB\-\-distro\fR \fINAME\fR]
[\fB\-\-backend\fR \fINAME\fR]
[\fB\-\-arch\fR \fIARCH\fR]
[\fB\-\-disk\fR \fIDEVICE\fR]
[\fB\-\-efi\fR]
[\fB\-\-encrypt\fR]
[\fB\-\-extra-subvols\fR \fILIST\fR]
.PP
Initialise PIF on this system.
When
.B \-\-disk
is provided, the target disk is partitioned, formatted, and the BTRFS
subvolume layout for the chosen backend is created under
.IR /mnt .
The backend's own
.B Init()
routine is then called to complete setup.
.PP
When
.B \-\-disk
is omitted, only the backend
.B Init()
is run.
This is useful when the disk is already partitioned by a live installer.
.TP
.BI \-\-distro " NAME"
Target distro identifier (e.g.\&
.IR arch ,
.IR debian ,
.IR fedora ).
Must match a file in
.IR /etc/pif/distros/<NAME>.toml .
.TP
.BI \-\-backend " NAME"
Immutability backend to use.
Overrides
.B [pif].backend
in the config file.
.TP
.BI \-\-arch " ARCH"
Target CPU architecture.
Auto-detected if omitted.
Valid values:
.IR x86_64 ,
.IR aarch64 ,
.IR armv7 ,
.IR riscv64 ,
.IR ppc64le ,
.IR s390x .
.TP
.BI \-\-disk " DEVICE"
Block device to partition (e.g.\&
.IR /dev/sda ,
.IR /dev/nvme0n1 ).
.B Warning:
all existing data on this device will be destroyed.
.TP
.B \-\-efi
Create an EFI System Partition.
Enabled by default.
Disable with
.B \-\-efi=false
for BIOS/legacy boot.
.TP
.B \-\-encrypt
Encrypt the root partition with LUKS2 (requires cryptsetup \(>= 2.0).
The container is formatted with AES\-XTS\-512 and the Argon2id key derivation
function.
Only the root partition is encrypted; the EFI/boot partition remains
unencrypted so the bootloader can read the kernel and initramfs.
.IP
The passphrase is resolved in this order:
.RS
.IP 1. 4
.B \-\-encrypt\-passphrase\-file
.IP 2. 4
.B ILF_LUKS_PASSPHRASE
environment variable
.IP 3. 4
Interactive prompt via cryptsetup
.RE
.TP
.BI \-\-encrypt\-passphrase\-file " FILE"
Path to a file containing the LUKS2 passphrase (trailing newline stripped).
The file should be readable only by root (mode 0400); a warning is printed
if group or world read bits are set.
Using a file or the
.B ILF_LUKS_PASSPHRASE
env var keeps the passphrase out of the process argument list.
.TP
.BI \-\-extra-subvols " LIST"
Comma-separated list of additional BTRFS subvolumes to create beyond the
backend defaults (e.g.\&
.IR @snapshots,@opt ).
Only meaningful for BTRFS-based backends:
.BR ashos ,
.BR frzr ,
.BR akshara ,
.BR btrfs-dwarfs .
Ignored for
.B abroot
and
.BR nixos .
.
.SS pif upgrade
.B pif upgrade
[\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR]
[\fB\-\-force\fR]
[\fB\-\-pkg\fR \fIPKG\fR[,\fIPKG\fR...]]
.PP
Perform an atomic system upgrade.
Before upgrading, a pre-upgrade snapshot is created automatically.
If the upgrade fails and
.B auto_rollback
is enabled in
.IR pif.toml ,
the system is rolled back to the pre-upgrade snapshot.
Pre- and post-upgrade hooks are run if configured.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Report what would change without applying it.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Skip pre-flight checks.
.TP
.BI \-\-pkg " PKG"
Additional packages to install during the upgrade.
May be specified multiple times or as a comma-separated list.
.
.SS pif rollback
.B pif rollback
[\fB\-\-snapshot\fR \fIID\fR]
[\fB\-\-list\fR]
.PP
Revert the system to the previous state.
If
.B \-\-snapshot
is omitted, the backend chooses the most recent previous state.
.TP
.BI \-\-snapshot " ID"
Specific snapshot ID to roll back to.
.TP
.B \-\-list
Print available snapshots (ID, name, deployed marker, timestamp) and exit
without performing a rollback.
Use this to identify the target ID before committing.
.
.SS pif snapshot
.B pif snapshot
.IR SUBCOMMAND " [" OPTIONS ]
.PP
Manage snapshots.
.TP
.B pif snapshot create [\-\-label LABEL]
Create a snapshot of the current root.
The snapshot is named
.IB LABEL - TIMESTAMP
where
.I TIMESTAMP
is in ISO 8601 format.
Prints the backend-assigned snapshot ID on success.
.TP
.B pif snapshot list
List all snapshots.
The currently deployed snapshot is marked with
.BR * .
.TP
.B pif snapshot delete \-\-id ID
Delete the snapshot with the given ID.
Deployed snapshots are never deleted.
.TP
.B pif snapshot deploy \-\-id ID
Set the snapshot with the given ID as the next boot target.
.
.SS pif status
.B pif status
.PP
Display the current system state: active backend, current root,
mutability, snapshot count, and any backend-specific metadata.
.
.SS pif mutable
.B pif mutable
.IR SUBCOMMAND
.PP
Toggle filesystem mutability.
.TP
.B pif mutable enter
Make the root filesystem temporarily writable.
The active session is recorded in
.I /run/pif-mutable.lock
so that
.B pif mutable exit
can restore immutability from a separate process.
.TP
.B pif mutable exit
Restore immutability by reading
.I /run/pif-mutable.lock
and reversing the toggle method used during
.BR enter .
Returns an error if no session is active.
.
.SS pif pkg
.B pif pkg
.IR SUBCOMMAND " " PACKAGE ...
.PP
Manage packages inside an atomic transaction.
Not all backends support this operation; see
.B pif backends
for capability information.
.TP
.B pif pkg add PACKAGE...
Install one or more packages atomically.
.TP
.B pif pkg remove PACKAGE...
Remove one or more packages atomically.
.
.SS pif backends
.B pif backends
.PP
List all registered backends and their capability flags.
.PP
Capability flags:
.RS
.TP
.B snapshot
Named snapshot create/list/delete/deploy
.TP
.B rollback
Revert to previous state
.TP
.B atomic-pkg
Per-package install/remove in a transaction
.TP
.B oci-images
Pull and apply OCI container images
.TP
.B mutable
Toggle read-write mode at runtime
.TP
.B compression
Backend-native data compression
.TP
.B multi-boot
Manage multiple bootable entries
.TP
.B thin-provision
LVM thin provisioning support
.RE
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/pif/pif.toml
System-wide configuration file.
See
.BR pif.toml (5)
for the full schema.
.TP
.I /etc/pif/distros/*.toml
Per-distro capability declarations.
.TP
.I /run/pif-mutable.lock
Active mutable session token.
Created by
.B pif mutable enter
and removed by
.BR "pif mutable exit" .
.TP
.I /usr/lib/systemd/system/pif-update.service
Systemd service unit for periodic upgrades.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/systemd/system/pif-update.timer
Systemd timer that triggers
.I pif-update.service
daily with a randomised delay.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ILF_LUKS_PASSPHRASE
Passphrase used for LUKS2 encryption when
.B \-\-encrypt
is set and
.B \-\-encrypt\-passphrase\-file
is not provided.
Keeping the passphrase in an environment variable avoids it appearing in
.IR /proc/<pid>/cmdline .
If both this variable and
.B \-\-encrypt\-passphrase\-file
are set, the file takes precedence.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Initialise a new system on
.I /dev/nvme0n1
using the
.B ashos
backend on Arch Linux:
.PP
.RS
.EX
pif init \-\-distro arch \-\-backend ashos \-\-disk /dev/nvme0n1 \-\-efi
.EE
.RE
.PP
Perform a dry-run upgrade to see what would change:
.PP
.RS
.EX
pif upgrade \-\-dry\-run
.EE
.RE
.PP
Create a named snapshot before making manual changes:
.PP
.RS
.EX
pif snapshot create \-\-label before\-experiment
.EE
.RE
.PP
Make the root temporarily writable, install a package, then restore:
.PP
.RS
.EX
pif mutable enter
pacman \-S --noconfirm htop
pif mutable exit
.EE
.RE
.PP
Initialise with LUKS2 encryption on
.IR /dev/sda
(interactive passphrase prompt):
.PP
.RS
.EX
pif init \-\-distro arch \-\-backend ashos \-\-disk /dev/sda \-\-efi \-\-encrypt
.EE
.RE
.PP
Initialise with LUKS2 encryption using a passphrase file:
.PP
.RS
.EX
pif init \-\-distro arch \-\-backend ashos \-\-disk /dev/sda \-\-efi \-\-encrypt \e
    \-\-encrypt\-passphrase\-file /root/luks.key
.EE
.RE
.PP
List available snapshots before rolling back:
.PP
.RS
.EX
pif rollback \-\-list
.EE
.RE
.PP
Roll back to a specific snapshot:
.PP
.RS
.EX
pif rollback \-\-snapshot 20250101T120000Z
.EE
.RE
.PP
List all registered backends and their capabilities:
.PP
.RS
.EX
pif backends
.EE
.RE
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
An error occurred.
The error message is printed to stderr.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pif.toml (5),
.BR btrfs (8),
.BR nixos-rebuild (8),
.BR abroot (1),
.BR ash (1)
.
.SH AUTHORS
Penguins Immutable Framework contributors.
Backends are maintained by their respective upstream projects:
Vanilla-OS (ABRoot), ashos project (AshOS), ChimeraOS (frzr),
blendOS (akshara), btrfs-dwarfs-framework contributors, NixOS project.
.
.SH LICENSE
PIF core and CLI: GPL-3.0.
Each backend retains its upstream license.
