.TH POWERWASH 1 "2024" "Penguins Powerwash 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
powerwash \- distro-agnostic, filesystem-agnostic factory reset for Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B powerwash
[\fIglobal-flags\fR] \fIcommand\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B powerwash
resets a Linux system to a clean state without reinstalling the OS.
It detects the running distribution and filesystem automatically, routes
all package operations through the appropriate package manager (apt, dnf,
pacman, zypper, emerge, xbps), and takes a backup before any destructive
operation.
.PP
All destructive commands respect
.B \-\-dry\-run
mode, which prints every action without executing it.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Reset modes
.TP
.B soft
Clear user configuration files (dotfiles) for all or specified users.
Installed packages and home directory data are not affected.
.TP
.B medium
Remove user-installed packages, reset APT/DNF/pacman sources to
distribution defaults, and clear user dotfiles.
Home directory data is preserved.
.TP
.B hard
Full factory reset. Removes all user-installed packages, wipes home
directories, resets system configuration, and clears logs.
Requires double confirmation. A backup is taken unless
.B \-\-no\-backup
is specified.
.TP
.B sysprep
Generalize the system for disk imaging. Clears machine-id, SSH host
keys, network leases, cloud-init state, and logs. Installs a one-shot
systemd service to regenerate identifiers on first boot of the clone.
Use
.B \-\-shutdown
to power off automatically after sysprep.
.TP
.B hardware \fIsubcommand\fR
Manage hardware device resets.
.RS
.TP
.B hardware list
List PCI and USB devices with their sysfs BUS IDs.
.TP
.B hardware rebind \fIbus-id\fR [...]
Unbind and rebind one or more devices via sysfs.
.TP
.B hardware vendor-reset \fIpci-id\fR
Trigger a vendor-specific GPU reset via the vendor-reset kernel module.
.RE
.SS Backup management
.TP
.B backup create [\-\-encrypt] [\-\-dest \fIdir\fR] [\-\-users \fIu1,u2\fR]
Create a timestamped backup of packages, repos, home directories, /etc,
fstab, crontabs, Docker metadata, and GRUB config.
.B \-\-encrypt
protects the archive with GPG symmetric encryption.
.TP
.B backup list
List available backups with timestamps and sizes.
.TP
.B backup restore-packages \fIdir\fR
Reinstall packages from a backup's package list.
.TP
.B backup restore-home \fIdir\fR
Restore home directories from a backup archive.
.TP
.B backup decrypt \fIfile\fR [\fIdest\fR]
Decrypt a GPG-encrypted backup archive.
.SS Snapshot management
.TP
.B snapshot create [\fIlabel\fR]
Create a read-only filesystem snapshot (btrfs or ZFS only).
.TP
.B snapshot list
List powerwash snapshots.
.TP
.B snapshot rollback \fIname\fR
Roll back to a snapshot. Requires reboot to complete.
.TP
.B snapshot delete \fIname\fR
Delete a snapshot.
.SS Other commands
.TP
.B info
Show detected distribution, filesystem type, and loaded plugins.
.TP
.B plugins
List available and loaded plugins.
.TP
.B menu
Launch the interactive TUI menu.
.SH GLOBAL FLAGS
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run, \-n
Print all actions without executing them. Safe to run as a preview.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable verbose debug output.
.TP
.B \-\-log \fIfile\fR
Write log output to \fIfile\fR (default: /var/log/powerwash.log).
.TP
.B \-\-backup\-dir \fIdir\fR
Override the backup destination directory
(default: /var/lib/powerwash/backups).
.TP
.B \-\-version, \-V
Print version and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-help, \-h
Print usage summary and exit.
.SH RESET MODE COMPARISON
.TS
l l l l l l.
Mode	Dotfiles	Packages	Home data	System cfg	Machine ID
_
soft	reset	unchanged	unchanged	unchanged	unchanged
medium	reset	purged	unchanged	sources reset	unchanged
hard	reset	purged	wiped	reset	unchanged
sysprep	unchanged	unchanged	unchanged	reset	cleared
.TE
.SH PLUGIN SYSTEM
Plugins are shell scripts placed in
.IR /usr/local/lib/powerwash/plugins/{distro,filesystem,hardware}/ .
They are sourced automatically when their
.B PW_PLUGIN_MATCH
regex matches the detected distro ID or filesystem type.
.PP
A plugin must declare:
.RS
.nf
PW_PLUGIN_NAME="my-plugin"
PW_PLUGIN_TYPE="distro"
PW_PLUGIN_MATCH="ubuntu|debian"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Optional hook functions:
.B pw_plugin_pre_reset\fR,
.B pw_plugin_post_reset\fR,
.B pw_plugin_pre_backup\fR,
.B pw_plugin_post_backup\fR.
.SH DEVICE REBIND ON RESUME
To rebind devices automatically after resume from sleep, edit
.I /etc/powerwash/rebind-devices.conf
and add sysfs BUS IDs (one per line), then enable the service:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sudo systemctl enable --now powerwash-rebind.service
.fi
.RE
.PP
Find BUS IDs with
.BR "powerwash hardware list" .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/powerwash/rebind-devices.conf
Device BUS IDs to rebind on resume.
.TP
.I /var/lib/powerwash/backups/
Default backup storage directory.
.TP
.I /var/log/powerwash.log
Default log file.
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/powerwash-rebind.service
systemd service for device rebind on resume.
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/powerwash-firstboot.service
One-shot service installed by sysprep to regenerate machine identifiers.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Preview a full factory reset without making changes:
.B sudo powerwash --dry-run hard
.TP
Reset dotfiles for a single user:
.B sudo powerwash soft --users alice
.TP
Medium reset, keeping specific packages:
.B sudo powerwash medium --keep vim,git
.TP
Create an encrypted backup:
.B sudo powerwash backup create --encrypt
.TP
Prepare a disk image:
.B sudo powerwash sysprep --shutdown
.TP
Rebind a USB controller after resume:
.B sudo powerwash hardware rebind 0000:00:14.0
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR apt (8),
.BR dnf (8),
.BR pacman (8),
.BR btrfs (8),
.BR zfs (8),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR gpg (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Penguins Powerwash contributors.
.PP
Synthesized from:
gaining/Resetter, cazique/resetter-for-linux, teejee2008/aptik,
thekaleabsamuel/oem-sysprep, bulletmark/rebind-devices,
gnif/vendor-reset, and others.
.SH LICENSE
GPL-3.0. See https://github.com/penguins-powerwash/penguins-powerwash
